Contribution process including Maturity Levels (#155)
gruetter/innerSourceTest: meta/contributor-handbook.md

# Contributor Handbook

This document lays out a basic guideline of how to write and contribute a new pattern.

## Maturity Levels

We defined four maturity levels for patterns: The higher a pattern's maturity level, the more strictly it was validated and the better is its writing.

### In a Nutshell

| \# | Name | Description | Time to merge |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| 1 | Initial | Contains an initial pattern idea or what we call a donut (a pattern with missing sections). | A few days / weeks |
| 2 | Structured | Contains a complete pattern that it is not properly validated yet (e.g. because it only synthesizes an idea or the experiences from one instead of three organizations). | A few days / weeks |
| 3 | Validated | The pattern is validated (e.g. because three or more instances exists and are synthesized by the pattern) and its writing is of high quality. | One or two months |

> | 4 | Established | The pattern is validated, its writing is of "text book" quality, and the community agrees it is responsible to use it as teaching material. | As long as it takes |

Reviewer: "The pattern is validated" is a repetition from stage 3. Could be left away?

What do you mean by "responsible to use it as teaching material"? That sounds somewhat bureaucratic to me. Below a proposal with simpler language.

```suggestion
| 4 | Established | The writing of the pattern is of "text book" quality. The community agrees to use this pattern as InnerSource teaching material. | As long as it takes |
```

Reviewer 2: Something tells me that stuff got lost in translation from non-native English-speakers here and would be "Verwendung zu Lehrzwecken ist verantwortbar" in German.
~ "Can be responsibly used for teaching purposes".

> | 4 | Holy | The pattern is validated, its writing is of "text book" quality, and the community agrees it is responsible to use it as teaching material. | Included in the patterns catalogue and patterns book | As long as it takes |

Reviewer 3: Strongly recommend that we not use the term Holy, both because some may consider this sacrilegious and because it seems to convey the sense that such a pattern cannot be revised, that it is perfect. That should never be the case.

How about: Established

Author: Thanks for this suggestion, @NewMexicoKid.

> some may consider this sacrilegious

I am really sorry. I was not intending to offend anyone. On the contrary, I want us to stay a community where every humam being feels welcomed - independently of religious beliefs, political views, gender identity, race, nationality, and any other factors.

> it seems to convey the sense that such a pattern cannot be revised, that it is perfect

What I wanted to convey is that we need to be extra careful because changes / revisions might come at a higher cost in this maturity level. I agree that `established` conveys this better. 

Let's wait another 24h for others to jump into the discussion. Otherwise, I'll change to `established`.

Author: I adapted the documents to use the term `established` for the highest maturity level and will mark this conversation as resolved :)

To achieve a given maturity level a pattern has to satisfy the requirements for that given maturity level and lower levels. The following sections lay out the requirements per maturity level in detail.

### Requirements: Level 1 - Initial

Patterns (or other documents) of level 1 are stored in the directory `/1-initial`.

- Document types:
	- Patterns (`pattern-*.md`)
	- Donuts - patterns without solution or other missing sections (`donut-*.md`)
	- Tale - unstructured information in any form (`tale-*.md`)
	
- Validation requirements:
	- N/A
	
- Content requirements:
	- The document is readible & comprehensible for other's than the author(s)
	- The author(s) contribute the contents according to the [license](../LICENSE.txt) & are allowed to do so
	- Thoughts and contents by third parties are quoted / referenced explicitly

	
### Requirements: Level 2 - Structured

Patterns of level 2 are stored in the directory `/2-structured`.

- Document types:
	- Patterns (`pattern-*.md`)
	
- Validation requirements:

> 	- N/A

Reviewer 3: I think it would be helpful to note that this pattern has been used in at least one instance (at least a partial validation).

Author: Thanks for this feedback @NewMexicoKid and @fwan2000 :) Would the following work for you?
```suggestion
	- Is partially validated by at least one known instance
		- Or: pattern warrants to still be included (e.g. because validation is not feasible in the foreseeable future)
```

My reasoning behind that loophole: I expect that for a few (less than a handfull) future patterns it might not be possible to provide validation validated within a time frame of maybe years. Still, we want to open up a path to let them mature (after a careful discussion in the community). This should be an extraordinary case.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for clarifying @maxcapraro . There's need/value to capture ideas/proposals as patterns for others to implement/validate. While proven patterns are good for adoption, there're times people are looking for ideas to tackle their problem even though it's not been tried before. 

I guess for people looking for ideas, they can look across structured, proven & established patterns knowing they have different maturity level. For people looking for proven patterns or teaching, that would be restricted to proven & established patterns? If that's the case, structured can mean reviewed and approved by the community even though it's not validated. That sounds reasonable to me.

	
- Content requirements:
	- Complies with the [patterns format](pattern-template.md)

> 	- Complies with [basic style guide](#) - *Oops! We have not yet developed this*

Reviewer 2: Make an issue for the **basic style guide** #171

Author: Will do when I provide the next iteration of this PR :)

	- Complies with *basic style guide*(#) - *Oops! We have not yet developed this*
	
	
### Requirements: Level 3 - Agreed

> Patterns of level 3 are stored in the directory `/3-agreed`.

Reviewer: I think you renamed this maturity stage to `Validated`?

Author: Thank you :) Resolved!

- Document types:
	- Patterns (`pattern-*.md`)
	
- Validation requirements:
	- Is validated by at least three known instances

> 	- Considers all known instances to the best of working group members' knowledge

Reviewer: How this this point different from "Is validated by at least three known instances"?

Author: If it's validated by three instances, there can still be `x` instances that are doing something that is conflicting with the presented pattern. So, for this maturity level, it should not have such conflicts. Too strict?

Reviewer: This is fine by me, let's keep it.
Feel free to resolve this thread.

	- Community agreement (via lazy consensus of trusted committers) on correctness of contents
	
- Content requirements:

> 	- Uses & has no conflicts with working group terminology (defined by glossary / implicit usage) - *Oops! We have not yet developed this.*

Reviewer 2: Make an issue for **working group terminology**. I think we discussed the use of a _glossary_ in this context.
Done in the right format this could come in very handy while rendering later PDF / ePub / website products.

#170

Author: Will do when I provide the next iteration of this PR :)

	- Fits & has no conflicts with existing patterns (of this maturity level or higher)
	- Thorough review by at least two trusted committers
	
	
### Requirements: Level 4 - Established

Patterns of level 4 are stored in the directory `/4-established`.

- Document types:
	- Patterns (`pattern-*.md`)
	
- Validation requirements:

> 	- Complies with [advanced style guide](#) - *Oops! We have not yet developed this.*

Reviewer 2: Make an issue for **advanced style guide**. #169

Author: Will do when I provide the next iteration of this PR :)

> 	- Community agreement (via lazy consensus of trusted committers) this representing universal truth about InnerSource (using best judgment) and it being responsible to push it out

Reviewer: I wonder which additional quality improvement over stage 3 this requirement would achieve? The statement "universal truth" is too easy to argue about, and in stage 3 we already achieve "Community agreement (via lazy consensus of trusted committers) on correctness of contents".

So I would argue that we can leave this bullet point away completely.

Author: ```suggestion
```
I agree. It's to vague.

> 	- Is free of conflicts with other InnerSource Commons learning materials and external InnerSource literature or adresses these conflicts explicitly

Reviewer: What do you mean by "external InnerSource literature"? 
Can we make it more specific which material a pattern needs to be checked against?

Reviewer 2: I think "external InnerSource literature" would apply to academic papers, books published outside of this repo, external content by parties other than the ISCF discussing those effects. What did you intend to refer to with this @maxcapraro?

Author: Pretty much all external literature on InnerSource (white literature, grey literature, blog posts that gained traction).

Author: If other literature says something that is at odds with our patterns, we must resolve that at least by acknowledging the difference (or better: by making the case why the way we present is better)

Reviewer: This section got removed. This thread can be resolved.

	- Tale - unstructured information in any form (`tale-*.md`)
	
- Validation requirements:
	- N/A
	
- Content requirements:
	- The document is readible & comprehensible for other's than the author(s)
	- The author(s) contribute the contents according to the [license](../LICENSE.txt) & are allowed to do so
	- Thoughts and contents by third parties are quoted / referenced explicitly

	
### Requirements: Level 2 - Structured

Patterns of level 2 are stored in the directory `/2-structured`.

- Document types:
	- Patterns (`pattern-*.md`)
	
- Validation requirements:
	- Is partially validated by at least one known instance
		- Or: pattern warrants to still be included (e.g. because validation is not feasible in the foreseeable future)
	
- Content requirements:
	- Complies with the [patterns format](pattern-template.md)
	- Complies with [basic style guide](#) - *Oops! We have not yet developed this*
	
	
### Requirements: Level 3 - Agreed

Patterns of level 3 are stored in the directory `/3-agreed`.

- Document types:
	- Patterns (`pattern-*.md`)
	
- Validation requirements:
	- Is validated by at least three known instances

> 		- Or: pattern warrants to still be included (e.g. because validation is not feasible in the foreseeable future)

Reviewer 3: Suggest deleting here--this doesn't make sense if the pattern already has three known instances validating it.

Reviewer 2: Good point! Could you raise a commit suggestion for that please @NewMexicoKid?

Author: The following concensus seems to be forming more and more: Don't open loopholes in regards to validation. I think in the long run, this will pay off :) I happily deleted this line and will mark this thread as resolved.

	- Patterns (`pattern-*.md`)
	
- Validation requirements:
	- Is partially validated by at least one known instance

> 		- Or: pattern warrants to still be included (e.g. because validation is not feasible in the foreseeable future)

Reviewer 3: If validation is not feasible, what outweighs that on the side of inclusion?
I would say that validation might be that some elements of the pattern have been validated even if the pattern as a whole hasn't been validated--i.e., there is some likelihood that this pattern will work if tried out. I cannot imagine a pattern where validation is simply not feasible in the foreseeable future.

Reviewer 2: Good point. I wasn't able to come up with a pattern that's not feasible to validate after thinking for a bit. 
Maybe the phrasing here could be clarified or extended. 
Hinting to "Go, try it out."`*` was a good one here. Do you think you could create commit suggestion proposing a different/extended phrasing here @NewMexicoKid?

`*` One might want to add a few hints on how setup an try out such that it yields recordable or useful results wrt to the pattern, but that is something for a different document...

Reviewer 3: How about:

```suggestion
	- Has at least partial validation of individual solution elements when tried separately (i.e., there is objective reason to try the full solution) in the case where the full solution itself has not been validated

```
(edit by @lenucksi: turned your suggestion into a commit suggestion @NewMexicoKid)

I think we don't have to hint at people trying out patterns; clearly, if they have a problem and see some benefit to trying a proposed solution, they will do so. We should, though, recommend that they update a pattern to note their experiences if they have tried it out.

Author: > If validation is not feasible, what outweighs that on the side of inclusion?
I would say that validation might be that some elements of the pattern have been validated even if the pattern as a whole hasn't been validated--i.e., there is some likelihood that this pattern will work if tried out. I cannot imagine a pattern where validation is simply not feasible in the foreseeable future.

I thought about this question quite long and I think @NewMexicoKid you are right. Our definition of validation is that of the pattern being used successfully. That in itself is a pragmatic way of validation.

If validation is not feasible, then this means we believe the practice cannot be implemented and, in consequence, we should not let it reach a higher maturity level.

Author: @NewMexicoKid, @lenucksi : I used Tim's formulation as the base and adapted the text. Please resolve if that works for you :)
